AGN surveys in the X-ray regime have revealed that the majority of AGN
(3/4) are obscured, with 1/3 showing Compton-thick columns. This
indicates that hidden accretion is an important phase in the growth of
super-massive black holes. However, it remains unclear how much of this
obscuration is provided by the host galaxy; a question which cannot be
answered using a central point source.
Our novel approach employs 600 long gamma-ray bursts to "x-ray" the
column densities of their host galaxies. From these column densities, we
reconstruct the gas distribution of statistically average galaxies at
z=0.5-3 as a function of stellar mass. We find a host stellar-mass
dependence but little redshift evolution. We apply this result to the
AGN population, with some caveats (star-formation rate, metallicity).
Based on the AGN stellar-mass distribution, we find that host galaxy gas
fails to provide Compton-thick column densities, but still represents an
important, luminosity-independent obscurer with columns of N_H~1e22/cmÂ².
Our approach separates the galaxy-scale and nuclear ("torus") obscurers
for the first time and their covering factors. It sheds light on the
luminosity-dependence of the torus and recasts the discussion of the
evolution of AGN obscuration. We corroborate our findings through
ray-tracing in hydrodynamical simulations of galaxies, and analytic
limits valid also to mergers.
